1
CHAPTER ONE
1.0 Introduction
Contraceptives are devices used to prevent pregnancy. Knowledge and usage of contraceptives are important indicators of sexual health among youth. Planning, making available, and use of contraceptives is called family planning. Contraceptives have been used since ancient times, but effective and safe methods only became available in the 20th century. Some cultures limit or discourage access to contraceptives because they consider it to be morally, religiously, or politically undesirable.
The most effective Contraceptives are sterilization by means of vasectomy in males and tubal ligation in females, intrauterine devices (IUDs), and implantable contraceptives. This is followed by a number of hormone based methods including oral pills, patches, vaginal rings, and injections. Less effective methods include physical barriers such as condoms, diaphragms and contraceptives sponges and fertility awareness methods. The least effective methods are spermicides and withdrawal by the male before ejaculation. Sterilization, while highly effective, is not usually reversible; all other methods are reversible, most immediately upon stopping them. Safe sex, such as with the use of male or female condoms, can also help prevent sexually transmitted infections. Other Contraceptives methods do not protect against sexually transmitted diseases. Emergency Contraceptives can prevent pregnancy if taken within the 72 to 120 hours after unprotected sex. Some argue not having sex as a method of contraceptives use, but abstinence-only sex education may increase teenage pregnancies if offered without contraceptives education, due to non-compliance.
In teenagers, pregnancies are at greater risk of poor outcomes. Comprehensive sex education and access to Contraceptives decreases the rate of unwanted pregnancies in this age group. While all forms of Contraceptives can generally be used by young people, long-acting reversible Contraceptives such as implants, IUDs, or vaginal rings are more successful in reducing rates of teenage pregnancy. After the delivery of a child, a woman who is not exclusively breastfeeding may become pregnant again after as few as four to six weeks. Some contraceptives can be started immediately following the birth, while others require a delay of up to six months. In women who are breastfeeding, progestin-only methods are preferred over combined oral contraceptives pills. In women who have reached menopause, it is recommended that contraceptives be continued for one year after the last period.
2
About 222 million women who want to avoid pregnancy in developing countries are not using a modern contraceptives method. contraceptives use in developing countries has decreased the number of deaths during or around the time of pregnancy by 40% (about 270,000 deaths prevented in 2008) and could prevent 70% if the full demand for contraceptives were met. By lengthening the time between pregnancies, Contraception can improve adult women's delivery outcomes and the survival of their children. In the developing world women's earnings, assets, weight, and their children's schooling and health all improve with greater access to contraceptives. Contraception increases economic growth because of fewer dependent children, more women participating in the workforce, and less use of scarce resources. Examples of contraceptives include Abstinence, contraceptives pill, Condoms, Cervical Cap, Contraceptive Film, implants, foam and Suppositories, Diaphragm, Emergency Contraception, Intrauterine Contraception(IUD), Withdrawal etc.
Improvements of existing contraceptives methods and awareness are needed, as around half of those who get pregnant unintentionally are not using contraceptives at the time. A number of advancement of existing contraceptive methods are being studied, including a better female condom, an improved diaphragm, a patch containing only progestin, and a vaginal ring containing long-acting progesterone. A number of methods to perform sterilization via the cervix are being studied. One involves putting quinacrine in the uterus which causes scarring and infertility. While the procedure is inexpensive and does not require surgical skills, there are concerns regarding long-term side effects. Another substance, polidocanol, which functions in the same manner is being looked at. A device called Essure, which expands when placed in the fallopian tubes and blocks them, was approved in the United States in 2002.
It is believed that adequate use and knowledge of contraceptives would not only reduce unwanted pregnancy and but would stop unwanted pregnancy and reduce dependent and homeless children and infants around the world. Which could imply less dependent ratio and improved work force for better economic growth in Nigeria.
This project work is to determine the use of contraceptives among female undergraduates using Federal University of Technology, Akure (FUTA) as a case study using randomized response technique.
3
1.1 Motivation of study
This study was motivated by the undying interest in sample survey and a means to estimate a characteristic of a population by selecting a sample. It was also a desire to understand the concept of forced response and unrelated questions in sampling.
1.2 Aim and Objectives of Study
1.2.1 Aim
The aim of this project is to apply randomized response technique in estimating the proportion of female students who use contraceptives in the Federal University of Technology, Akure.
1.2.2 Objectives
The objectives of this study are to
 show the application of Randomized Response Technique as a method of estimating population of sensitive proportion, using a randomize device (deck of cards)
 create awareness about contraceptives to student using questionnaire.
 demonstrate the application of R software in the analysis of statistical survey.
1.3 Significance of Study
This research brings into focus the role of students, parents, lecturers, health workers, officials of ministry of health and ministry of education using Federal University of Technology, Akure as a case study.
1.4 Area of Study
This study uses information from female undergraduate students of the Federal University of Technology, Akure and spans across the six (6) schools and various departments of the university.
1.5 Definition of terms
1.5.1 Contraceptives
These are devices used to prevent pregnancy. They various devices, drugs, agents, sexual practices, or surgical procedures to prevent conception or impregnation (pregnancy). Contraception helps women plan if and when they want to have a baby.

4
1.5.2 Condoms
Effective condoms are made of latex or polyurethane. Unrolled, condoms look like long, thin balloons. They prevent body fluids from mixing when two people have sex. The condom is put onto the penis before the penis comes into contact with the vagina, mouth, or anus. They are also effective in preventing most sexually transmitted infections (STIs). Gonorrhea, chlamydia, and trichomoniasis are transmitted when infected semen or vaginal or other body fluids contact mucosal surfaces.
1.5.3 The Pill
The contraceptive pills have two hormones - an estrogen and progestin. They stop the release of the egg (ovulation), and also make the lining of the uterus thinner. When used correctly about 3 in every 1,000 women will become accidentally pregnant in the first year.
1.5.4 Withdrawal
When the man is about to have an orgasm he pulls his penis out of the vagina. The ejaculation occurs outside of the vagina. The idea behind this method is that no sperm will be deposited in the vagina.
1.5.5 Interviewer
This is the person who conducts the interview. They are also known as enumerators.
1.5.6 Respondent
This is the person being interviewed. He/she gives information according to the interviewer’s directives.
1.5.7 Response
This is when the interviewer is able to collect information from the respondent.
1.5.8 Non response
This is a situation whereby respondents fail to answer the question asked.
1.5.9 Simple Random sampling
A simple random sample is a subset of individuals (a sample) chosen from a larger set (a population). Each individual is chosen randomly and entirely by chance, such that each individual
5
has the same probability of being chosen at any stage during the sampling process, and each subset of k individuals has the same probability of being chosen for the sample as any other subset of k individuals. This process and technique is known as simple random sampling. A simple random sample is an unbiased surveying technique.
6

CHAPTER TWO
2.0 Literature Review
The Egyptian Ebers Papyrus from 1550 BCE and the Kahun Papyrus from 1850 BCE have within them some of the earliest documented descriptions of birth control: the use of honey, acacia leaves and lint to be placed in the vagina to block sperm. It is believed that in Ancient Greece silphium was used as contraceptive which, due to its effectiveness and thus desirability, was harvested into extinction.
In medieval Europe, any effort to halt pregnancy was deemed immoral by the Catholic Church, although it is believed that women of the time still used a number of birth control measures, such as coitus interruptus and inserting lily root and rue into the vagina. Women in the Middle Ages were also encouraged to tie weasel testicles around their thighs during sex to prevent pregnancy. The oldest condoms discovered to date were recovered in the ruins of Dudley Castle in England, and are dated back to 1640. They were made of animal gut, and were most likely used to prevent the spread of sexually transmitted diseases during the English Civil War. Casanova, living in 18th century Italy, described the use of a lambskin covering to prevent pregnancy; however, condoms only became widely available in the 20th century.
2.1 Birth Control Movement
The birth control movement developed during the 19th and early 20th centuries. The Malthusian League, based on the ideas of Thomas Malthus, was established in 1877 in the United Kingdom to educate the public about the importance of family planning and to advocate for getting rid of penalties for promoting contraception. It was founded during the "Knowlton trial" of Annie Besant and Charles Bradlaugh, who were prosecuted for publishing on various methods of contraceptives.
In the United States, Margaret Sanger and Otto Bobsein popularized the phrase " contraception" in 1914. Sanger was mainly active in the United States but had gained an international reputation by the 1930s. At the time, under the Comstock Law, distribution of contraceptive information was illegal. She jumped bail in 1914 after her arrest for distributing birth control information and left the United States for the United Kingdom to return in 1915. Sanger established a short-lived contraceptive clinic based in the Brownville section of Brooklyn, New York in 1916, which was shut down after eleven days and resulted in her arrest. The publicity surrounding the arrest, trial, and appeal sparked contraception activism across the United States.
7
The first permanent contraceptive clinic was established in Britain in 1921 by Marie Stopes working with the Malthusian League. The clinic, run by midwives and supported by visiting doctors, offered women's contraception advice and taught them the use of a cervical cap. Her clinic made contraception acceptable during the 1920s by presenting it in scientific terms. In 1921, Sanger founded the American Birth Control League, which later became the Planned Parenthood Federation of America. In 1924 the Society for the Provision of Birth Control Clinics was founded to campaign for municipal clinics; this led to the opening of a second clinic in Greengate, Salford in 1926. Throughout the 1920s, Stopes and other feminist pioneers, including Dora Russell and Stella Browne, played a major role in breaking down taboos about sex. In April 1930 the Birth Control Conference assembled 700 delegates and was successful in bringing contraception and abortion into the political sphere three months later, the Ministry of Health, in the United Kingdom, allowed local authorities to give contraception advice in welfare centres.
In 1936 the U.S. court ruled in U.S. V. One Package that medically prescribing contraception to save a person’s life or well-being was not illegal under the Comstock Law; following this decision, the American Medical Association Committee on Contraception revoked its 1936 statement condemning birth control. A national survey in 1937 showed 71 percent of the adult population supported the use of contraception. By 1938 347 birth control clinics were running in the United States despite their advertisement still being illegal. First Lady Eleanor Roosevelt publicly supported contraception and family planning. In 1966, President Lyndon B. Johnson started endorsing public funding for family planning services, and the Federal Government began subsidizing birth control services for low-income families. The Affordable Care Act, passed into law on March 23, 2010 under President Barack Obama, requires all plans in the Health Insurance Marketplace to cover contraceptive methods. These include barrier methods, hormonal methods, implanted devices, emergency contraceptives, and sterilization procedures.
2.2 Modern methods
In 1909, Richard Richter developed the first intrauterine device made from silkworm gut, which was further developed and marketed in Germany by Ernst Gräfenberg in the late 1920s.Gregory Pincus and John Rock with help from the Planned Parenthood Federation of America developed the first contraceptive pills in the 1950s, such as mestranol/noretynodrel, which became publicly available in the 1960s through the Food and Drug Administration under the name Enovid. Medical abortion became an alternative to surgical abortion with the availability of prostaglandin analogs in the 1970s and mifepristone in the 1980s.
8
2.3 Contraceptive Use in Nigeria
Sexual behaviors and contraceptive use among youth not only vary across countries and regions, but vary within a given area as well. The high maternal mortality and morbidity rate in Nigeria which is a major concern for every stakeholder in the health sector has non-usage of contraceptives as its major cause. WHO (1996), Oye-Adeniran et al. (2004). A further analysis shows that; young women are particularly vulnerable due to the lack of knowledge of contraceptives Anochie (2003). Other reproductive health risks include sexually transmitted diseases (STDs) including HIV Orji (2002). In fact, Adinma et al. (1995) postulated that 25% of maternal deaths is due to non-usage of contraceptives. A group of investigators found that, teenagers represent a large proportion of admissions, for sexual complications resulting in deaths at Ile-Ife Okonufua et al., (1992). A study of female students in Enugu State Nigeria, showed that, 21% of respondents reported having had unwanted pregnancy and 18% reported have no or little knowledge of contraceptives. In that study, 51% had never used a contraceptive method, and 76% did not use any method the first time they had sexual intercourse. This group of individuals is therefore the targets for adequate advocacy for contraceptive methods/usage, to reduce incidence of unwanted pregnancy Uche et al. (1997). Sexual activity amongst teenagers has increased over the years. Michael et al. (2003), Cadmus (2010) in the 1990 demographic and health survey (DHS), 40% of teenage women in Nigeria had given birth or expecting their first baby, with the highest incidence being in the Northern Region DHS, 1990; National Population Commission (NPC) (2004). In another study, it was found that 19% of women over 19years of age have never used a contraceptive and 80% of them were sexually active Uche et al. (1997).
In a survey at Ibadan, it was found that while over 90% of young men and women professed being informed about reproductive health, only 27% of those students could identify their monthly period and 44% of those had been pregnant with no or little knowledge of contraceptives. The young women were said to have blamed lack of family planning information for their non-use of contraceptives Nicholas et al. (1986) and DHS (2003). In another study at Ibadan, Cadmus (2010) found that sexually active young adults are less likely to use contraception than adults even in marriage. Adolescents were usually more informed about abortion and its sequelae than about contraception. In some cases, fears resulting from misconceptions about contraception contribute to none usage Orji (2002).
A study by Okpani and Okpani (2000) of seven hundred and sixty-eight (768) randomly selected single school girls from Port Harcourt (mean age 16.32 years) on aspects of sexual activity and
9
contraceptive use, showed that, two hundred and ten (210) pregnancies (24 deliveries and 186 induced abortions) had occurred in 142 out of 605 girls (78.8%) who admitted being sexually exposed. The mean, modal and youngest ages of initiation into sexual activity were 15.04, 15 and 12 years respectively. At the time of the survey, 190 girls (24.7%) were sexually active and 74.2% of their male consorts were older working men, suggesting financial gains, as a motive for the girls' sexual activity. Other findings were high awareness (72.4%) of the relationship between sexual activity and sexually transmitted diseases; a rather low level (56%) of knowledge of effective contraceptive methods, and limitation of contraceptive method use by sexually active girls, largely to the rhythm and withdrawal methods. Exposure to multiple sexual partners and a high level of parental approval of subjects' use of contraception were also present. It was suggested that, active efforts to promote sexuality education and contraceptive use, should be intensified among Nigerian adolescents Okpani (2000). Lack of contraceptive use is a major factor in the incidence of unwanted pregnancy.
10


CHAPTER THREE
3.0 Methodology
This is the roadmap of the project work. There are various approaches, strategies and data collection methods across the continuum of research philosophy. It is often misleading to prefer a single approach to the others. A blend of research approaches offers insights and gives a better result than a single approach. Primary data would be used for this work. Thereafter the Randomized Response Technique would be applied to the data collected.
3.1 Data Collection Method
The next step after deciding upon the combination of strategies is data collection. Limited by the choice of time horizon, Primary data would be used for this study in the form of questionnaires to female undergraduates of The Federal University of Technology, Akure across the Six (6) schools.
 School of Sciences(SOS)
 School of Agriculture Technology(SAAT)
 School of Engineering Technology(SEET)
 School of Management Technology(SMAT)
 School of Earth and Mineral Studies(SEMS)
 School of Environmental Technology(SET)
And from three (3) departments selected randomly under each school.
3.2 Data Analysis Techniques and Software
The main goal of analyzing or describing data is to learn more about the population from which it was drawn. The basic design of Randomized Response Technique that would be applied for this analysis is the unrelated response technique. Then appropriate conclusions would be made. The software to be used for this analysis is R software.
3.2.1 Basic Designs
The basic designs of the randomized response technique are classified into four types: mirrored question, forced response, disguised response, and unrelated question.
The designs make two assumptions:
11
(1) The randomization distribution is known to researchers
(2) Respondents comply with the instructions and answer the sensitive question truthfully when prompted.
For some randomized response methods, randomization is not explicitly done by the respondent using an instrument (i.e. Randomization device) such as coin flip, deck of cards, game tiles etc. Instead, they may exploit a random variation that already exists (e.g., phone number or birthday). We refer to all of these methods as randomized response techniques.
3.2.1.1 Unrelated Question Design
We used the unrelated question design, which was developed by Greenberg et al. (1969). Under this design, randomization determines whether a respondent should answer a sensitive question or an unrelated, non-sensitive question. Unlike the other designs, this design introduces an unrelated question to increase respondents’ compliance with survey instruction.
Furthermore, Moors (1971) showed that this design is more efficient than the mirror question, and it allows for quantitative responses. For example, Chi, Chow, and Rider (1972) applied the unrelated question design to study the incidence of induced abortions in Taiwan using pieces from the regionally popular game Go. The researchers interviewed a random sample of 2497 women between ages 15 and 49. Census data were used to estimate the proportion of the unrelated, innocuous question about the respondent’s year of birth. We reproduce the instructions here:
“Here is a bag; in it there are stones from the game ‘Go,’ some colored black and others white. Please take one stone out, and see by yourself what color it is, black or white. Don’t let me know whether it is black or white, but be sure you know which it is. If you take a black one, answer the question: ‘‘Have you ever had an induced abortion?’’ If you take a white one, answer the question: ‘‘Were you born in the lunar year of the horse?’’
Similar studies on abortion rates have been conducted in North Carolina. Other applications of the unrelated question include a criminology study of self-reported arrests in Philadelphia (Tracy and Fox 1981), a sociological assessment concerning the concealment of deaths in the household from local authorities in the Philippines (Madigan et al.1976). Let p denote the probability that respondents receive the sensitive question. This probability is assumed to be known. In the above example, it equals the proportion of black stones in the bag.
12

CHAPTER FIVE
5.0 Summary, Conclusion and Recommendation
5.1 Summary
Samples were drawn from the population (female FUTA undergraduate students) by a simple random sampling. Three departments from each of the six schools and eighteen departments in all were selected having a total of six hundred students to estimate contraceptive knowledge and usage among female FUTA undergraduate students.
Questionnaires were administered using the Randomized Response Technique with the use of randomizing device (deck of cards), the probability of selecting the sensitive question “A” being p=0.75. The number of the female undergraduate students which have a knowledge about contraceptives were 600 (i.e. the entire population) and those that use contraceptive materials was estimated at thirty-two percent (38%) of the total population considered. The analysis was carried out using R software.
5.2 Conclusion
With the use of Randomized Response Technique using a randomizing device (deck of cards) with probability of selecting the statement “A” to be p =0.75. The number of female FUTA undergraduate students with a knowledge is 600 and the proportion of female students using contraceptive materials was estimated at thirty-eight percent (38%) of the population. Hence this shows that Randomized Response Technique is an efficient technique in estimating sensitive population proportions compared to direct questioning. The use of questionnaire was very helpful in extracting information about contraceptives.
5.3 Recommendation
Finally, the results obtained from the use of contraceptives shows that the rate of sexual activity of female FUTA undergraduate students is reasonably high (i.e.38%) to the population investigated. Hence it is imperative that there should be adequate steps to curb this since researches have shown that sexuality has adverse effect to academic performance. In addition, Ministry of health and various stakeholders responsible for dissemination of information about the use of contraceptives should be commended because the result about the knowledge of contraceptives has shown a job well-done even though there is more work to be done.
13